 Previously it has been shown that base pairs in the
MFE structure with few competing probable pairs (as measured by Shannon entropy) are more likely to be correctly
predicted for small and large subunit rRNA (Huynen et al.
1997). 


Ding and Lawrence extended the partition function
calculation to compute a statistically valid sample of secondary structures in the Boltzmann ensemble and calculate
sampling statistics of structural features (Ding and
Lawrence 2001, 2003).


utilizes a recent set of nearest
neighbor parameters for determining the free energy at
37°C for an RNA secondary structure (Mathews et al. 2004),


4. can be used to argue inexact partition function calculation is still accurate and needed

For example, on average, 91.0% of base pairs in
the minimum free energy structure with a probability of
0.99 or greater of pairing are in the known structure based
on comparative sequence analysis. (Mathews, 2004)


The predicted minimum free energy (MFE) structure
provides a single best guess for the secondary structure, but 
it assumes that the secondary structure is at equilibrium,
that there is a single conformation for the RNA, and that
the thermodynamic parameters for evaluating conformation free energies are without error. 


5. DIRKS et al., 2003
The first
dynamic programming algorithms for secondary structure prediction were proposed by Waterman and Smith1,2 and Nussinov et al.3
In 1981, Zuker and Stiegler4 introduced an improved dynamic
programming algorithm that explores all possible unpseudoknotted
secondary structures in O(N4
) time, where N is the sequence
length. Several reviews describe subsequent progress on methods
for secondary structure prediction.5–7 In 1990, McCaskill8 described a different O(N4
) dynamic programming algorithm for
computing the partition function of a given sequence over all
possible unpseudoknotted secondary structures. Both the Zuker
and Stiegler structure prediction algorithm and the McCaskill
partition function algorithm can be reduced to O(N3
) complexity
using a simplified energy model.4,8 The partition function can be
used to derive thermodynamic properties of the equilibrium conformational ensemble including the base-pairing probability of any
two bases.8,9 As a result, the partition function holds promise as a
means of evaluating and improving sequence designs for molecules that are intended to adopt a specified secondary structure.10,11


6. Lu and Mathews 2009
Using MaxExpect, the
average PPV of optimal structure is improved from 66% to 68% at the same sensitivity level (73%) compared with free energy
minimization.